few minutes please
hmm
[Music]
so
uh
okay everyone good evening uh first of
all can i
first thank you all for enrolling
in this subject um
i'm sorry for the teething issues some
other students had started a few
parallel meetings and i was just
requesting them to finish that and
um come and join this meeting now whilst
i go through today's lecture
uh i wanted to put some ground rules so
that we are all aware of it and that
would make
it a better learning environment for
everyone
um i would be delivering the lecture
from scratch this is for your all
benefit and
you can i mean my lectures are
pre-recorded they are also available
on canvas but i would be there i would
be delivering them here as well and at
various points in time in the lecture
i'll be stopping and taking questions
so i do request everyone to
mute your uh mute your microphones
please please
can you can you please everyone can you
can i please request you to
mute your microphones now
aside from that
what i would be
also doing is as i said we will be going
through
the whole lecture slides one by one and
i'll be
going through them and you you would
i'll
i'll give you plenty of time to raise
questions and i will answer them one by
one
any question that you have put it in the
chat session please
or when i ask them you're welcome to
unmute yourself and ask me that question
but for the better part of the lecture
as i said it's best for everyone's
success
experience and for your own experience
as well to mute yourself
so um coming to today's
lecture can all of you see my
slides uh can i have a yes or no from
anyone please if you can see my slide
yeah we can see your slides excellent
thank you very much
excellent now uh as i said
i would like to take this opportunity to
warmly welcome you all to
this subject cloud computing and
software as a service
i do hope and i am very keenly looking
forward to
working with you all over the over this
semester
and in imbibing various
cloud computing related knowledge that i
have
and i also hope to be exposing you all
to a lot of industry best practices as
well
so in today's lecture we have three
modules
today's lecture is quite big but this is
the because this is week one
the only week one's lecture is three
hours long
uh after that we'll come back to one and
a half hour from 7
30 to 9 o'clock i will schedule a
regular lecture meeting
time for the remainder of the semester
so that everyone can join that session
and that
avoids the confusion that we had some
time ago
so the first module of today's lecture
is about
an introduction to the subject itself
the second module
is about cloud computing what is cloud
computing
and the third module is about
infrastructure
as a service this subject is
very hands-on so more or less
you would be getting your hands dirty
so to speak metaphorically in developing
applications
on different cloud platforms so
what i'm hoping to cover in the first
module
are the following things i want to
introduce the
the the subject coordinator which is
myself
and also other teaching staff the lab
assistants
and all those people i would then go
through the subject content and our plan
for the next
14 weeks or so i will discuss
in detail about the assessment items
and and what you would be hoping to
learn from this subject and i would also
be discussing about what you would need
to do at the bare minimum to get a pass
in this subject as well
and then i will also talk about
how the classes and the tutorials would
be organized
particularly so uh during this
covid uh during the pandemic phase
so i am the subject coordinator
my name is faru you can simply call me
by my first name
farooq i am the head of discipline
for software engineering at the school
of computer science at uts
so i have been at uts for about
since 2012 prior to that i worked at
curtin university of technology this is
my email address
you're most welcome to send me an email
about any subject-related matter
that you may have more so
i am always contactable by a team so
you may choose to send me your question
or
whatever issue that you have via teams
as well
we are very lucky to have
an extremely experienced
staff tutors who would be looking after
you during the labs and the tutors
themselves
now depending upon
which lab you end up enrolling in
your lab your lab tutor maybe
may differ so the first one
the first lab assistant is mr muhammad
raza
this is his email address and raza
just for your knowledge is in the very
final stages of completing his phd
thesis
in the area of cloud computing
safa is another lab assistant
she is in the first year of her phd
thesis and her thesis is
focused on artificial intelligence
and last but not the least uh wilder
pardo mochari he has recently finished
his phd thesis
and he would be taking a few of the labs
as well
i will be going to the lab details and
and outlining which lab assistant is
taking which lab in a few while
but these are the three wonderful lab
assistants
that we would have they are extremely
knowledgeable in subject matter and
expertise
so this is what we
plan to do over the next 14 weeks or so
and a lot of attention and detail
care and effort has gone into creating
this plan
let me go through this briefly you will
find
this in mentioned outlined in detail in
the subject outline as well
so each one of these dates these are
week beginning so today is the 25th
and we are having the first lecture
which is introduction to the subject
and infrastructure as a service but this
is listed
as week beginning 22nd of february
2021 so just be mindful of that
so in week one i'm going to introduce
you about what's cloud
what is infrastructure as a service okay
we don't have any lab
during this week next week
we would be discussing about platform as
a service
and software as a service two different
flavors of cloud computing
and again we don't have any lab for this
week
um the reason why
week two is highlighted in blue
is because i will be handing out
assignment one
in week two week three
week beginning 8th of march is
we discuss about virtualization which is
a
very crucial element in the context of
cloud computing we will discuss
about virtualization in detail and it is
during this week that the labs begin
okay so for the labs
um i mean i will come to whether these
labs are face to face
or are online but for those of you
who are doing the labs online you can do
it
on your own laptop you don't need a
specialized laptop
any commodity laptop would do just fine
for those of you who are coming onto
campus and i'll be talking about that in
a little while
you can either bring your laptop or you
can use
uts machines as well week four
we will be discussing about uh and
we will start so during from week four
onwards
we will start discussing about amazon
web services and when i say we would say
excuse me who is that
just give me one second please
i'm sorry i did mention that everyone
should turn off their
microphones but
so uh moving on so week
four week five
week six and the mids to back
during these four weeks we i would be
teaching
you about various amazon web services
um especially in week four
i we will be talking about amazon
elastic bean stock
uh and then in that week we will be
doing
the corresponding lab session as well
so we we have made a case studies for
each one of these in which you would be
first
the case study would be handed out to
you and your lab
tutor would take you step by step
through a journey of solving that case
study
week five due to uh
easter friday there would be no um
lecture or lab and and we have done this
for consistency purposes however we will
be making up for this
by teaching you in the midst to back
week
in week six we will be discussing about
how you can customize your elastic bean
stock environment
and then you will have a lab on
customizing elastic bean stock during
week
six week seven we will be
discussing about various aws storage
services
and there are half a dozen of those you
will be
exposed to all of them and you will be
we will be discussing about
when which service you should use when
um and again we will have a lab on
aws storage services now one thing so
week four five although there's not
uh no no instruction during week five
week
six and the mids to wack are all
focused on aws in due
course you will be provided access to
the aws
platform you will get credits
to work on the aws platform the labs
would be based
on the aws platform itself so
i mean this subject is providing you
an introduction to about how to use
some of the crucial or core aws
services after the mids to whack
we move on to a different cloud platform
and that platform is the force.com
platform
so week seven week eight
week nine week ten these
four weeks we will be i'll be explaining
you all
how you can make simple or even
sophisticated applications on the
force.com platform
okay week seven we will be discussing
about how you can make cloud data
objects
how you can write validation rules how
you can create interfaces
correspondingly the tutorial in the
tutorial we will have a lab
focused on what has been taught in week
seven
now one thing here i want to tell you
again you see week seven
is highlighted in light green color
the reason for that is assignment one
which was handed out to you
or which will be handed out to you next
week
will be due back in week seven
uh furthermore i will give out
assignment to in week 7 which
will be focused on force.com
so building on what we have learned in
week 7
in week 8 we will discuss
about how you can secure
your cloud application um and again the
corresponding lab
covers about carrying it out in a
practical sense
again you will be given a case study and
the instructor will
lead you in a step-by-step manner in
securing your
cloud application week 9 and week 10
are focused on how you can build in some
sort of
business processes or intelligence
into your force.com application week
nine
focuses on how you can build in
workflows uh how you can carry out
step-by-step procedural activities
automatically in force.com
what are the constructs you could use
and week 10
discusses about how you can automate the
approval process
so as you can see we have about
roughly four lectures four in-depth
hands-on lectures and labs on aws
for in-depth hands-on lectures
and labs on force.com the purpose of
this subject
ladies and gentlemen is to provide you
introduction to how development software
development can be done in the cloud now
this is an
introductory cloud computing subject it
starts off with
pretty much the basics starting today
my next module will be about what is
cloud computing
and takes you through the journey of
the different flavors of cloud computing
infrastructure as a service
platform as a service software as a
service virtualization
how can you build perhaps
many applications in aws how can you
build many applications in force.com
admittedly it doesn't go to the level of
depth to perhaps make you an expert in
either
but in the past i've had numerous
students who
took this subject and after that with a
little bit of mentorship or guidance and
on their own accord
they were able to go and pass
certification exams
the purpose of this subject as i see
is to dip your toe in water and for you
to get a
feel for what the cloud is and how
development in the cloud happens
so the last two lectures we'll have
prominent guest lectures from the
industry talking to us
and i am in the final stages of
arranging this and i'll make a formal
announcement
soon and the very final week week 12
is the group presentations
for assignment 2. so i do
hope that this gives you all a feel for
what lies in store what we are going to
learn
over the next 14 weeks
so let me take a few minutes to explain
you all the
various assessment items and then i'll
throw the floor open to questions
so we have got a few different
assessment
items in other words we have got three
assignments
each in this subject one thing that is
important to note
is that there are two cohorts of
students
in this subject the first cohort are the
undergraduate students the ones enrolled
in
four one zero zero one that's the
subject code
the other one are the postgraduate
students
the ones who are enrolled in 42904
while the lectures and labs are
perhaps similar the learning outcomes
and what
each cohort gets from the subject is
quite different
so for assignment one which is a
research essay
i'll give you a few topics and you are
most welcome to come up with your own
topic
what you are required to do is do
is research on that topic based on
scientific articles or industry reports
and write a an essay um
i will be releasing this assignment one
next week so for the undergraduate
students
that is the students enrolled in subject
four one zero zero one
this constitutes ten percent of the
subject grade
for the post postgraduate students it's
much higher and we expect a
higher level of critical thinking and
reasoning from the postgraduate students
and that constitutes 30 percent of the
subject grade
this assignment will have to be carried
out in groups of three
i will talk about how you can form
groups in a little while
but assignment one and assignment two
will be carried out
in groups of three and we will provide
you with
detailed feedback and help and direction
and mentorship in doing these
assignments
as we go through the second assignment
is developing a mini application
using force.com and
this assignment in turn is comprised of
a few different assessment
items so the first the assessment item
two which is
developing the sas application
using force.com for the undergraduate
students
this constitutes 25 percent of the
subject
grade for the post graduate students
it constitutes 15 percent of the subject
grade
so there is differential waiting for the
two cohorts
and again this assignment two
is to be done in groups of three
so for assignment to you would not just
be
developing the application using
force.com
but you would be writing a professional
report
and you would be making a presentation
to your fellow colleagues
and to the tutors as well so assessment
item three focuses on
writing that report and for both the
cohorts
undergraduate as well as post graduate
the report constitutes 10 percent of the
subject grade
um the final component in assignment 2
which is
presentation that constitutes
for the undergraduate students that
constitutes
20 percent of the assignment grade and
for the post graduate it constitutes
10 percent of the assignment grade so
of the subject grade so overall you see
i mean
um assigned assignment 2 which is
developing
a mini application using force.com
is a major assessment part in this
subject
moving on the assessment item
five or the very last assessment item is
an
individual assessment item in which
we will give you a case study based on
that case study
you will develop the solution for that
in amazon web services so
using the skills that have been imparted
to you
during week 3 week 4
week 5 and week 6
in aws you will be solving that case
study
and we will be assessing you based on
that
and for both the cohorts undergraduate
as well as postgraduate
it constitutes 35 percent almost a third
of the subject grade
so uh with with these three different
assignments first one being a research
report
second one being developing application
using force.com
and the third one being developing
application using aws
some of you might be wondering what do i
need to do
to pass this subject well at the bare
minimum
you need to procure a
minimum of 50 percent as the overall
aggregate subject mark that is the mark
assignment 1 plus assignment 2 plus
assignment 3.
the overall needs to be at least 50
percent
and that's true not just for
undergraduate
but also for postgraduate students as
well
so even postgraduate students they need
to get at least 50 percent
and if they do that they qualify for a
pass in the subject
now i would briefly talk about
how the lectures would be organized and
more importantly how the tutorials would
be organized
and i'm sure you all are keen to learn
about this
uh from me so the lectures
due to the ongoing kovid 19 situation
and particularly due to uts and fvit
policy
will be held online they will be
delivered
using themes and to avoid any future
confusion
i will schedule i'll i'll schedule this
lecture for the whole group
from next week onwards till the
remainder of the semester
we just go and join that group um
so that it avoids multiple groups being
formed
such as what happened some time ago so
what i would do prior to each lecture
including this one for example
is i will make detailed videos
explaining the concepts with examples
for you all
to to see to view prior to coming to the
lectures
each week at the start of the week
perhaps on
monday or even on sunday for that matter
i will
make and upload those videos on canvas
for those of you who are able to you can
view those videos
prior to coming to the lecture however i
do
recognize the fact that not every one of
you would be able to
see the videos prior to coming to the
lecture itself
so again during the lecture time
i would be going through the entire
lecture slides and delivering the
lecture
as normal however what i would do is
at regular points in time i will be
stopping
and taking questions so that
i get opportunity to interact with you
you get opportunity to interact with me
and for those and for those of you who
have questions
um you can get them you can get them
answered
as soon as possible
the labs are a little bit different in
the way that they
are organized so firstly
as i've explained you labs start from
week 3 onwards so there is no lab this
week
and there is no lab next week as well
very
soon perhaps i i already have received
it but
you will be getting credentials to login
into your aws accounts
for this subject please don't log in and
waste your credits
so from week three onwards when we start
we would start with aws now
as per uts and the faculty of
engineering nit policy
the labs for the undergraduate students
which are four one zero zero one and
there are
five labs they would be held face to
face
on campus the lab instructors
would be present on campus they would
deliver the content
face to face however
again as per uts and feit policy the
labs for the students enroll in the
postgraduate cohort
will be held online and online using
themes
so i'm most of you have would have
received
um the lab invitation
or you would have received the which
group you belong to there are seven
groups for postgraduate students and if
you have not received
your team's invitation for
for belonging to one of these lab groups
please let me know so
each week like for example if this today
i have taught you about
elastic bean stock i'll give out a case
study
um you can try to solve the case study
and during the lab your instructor will
take you in a step-by-step manner to
solve the case study
labs will be recorded will be available
in the channel and this is for post
graduate students that is 42904
only the ones for undergraduate
i mean the labs will be again solved in
a step-by-step
manner but they will be done on campus
so i do hope that you have taken the
time to read through the subject outline
what i have just
gone through in the last say 25 minutes
or so
is a gist of the subject outline
if you have not done so i would highly
recommend that please take a few minutes
after the lecture today to go through
the subject outline
i thank you very much for your time that
brings me to
end of the first module
uh what i would
like to do is pause for a few minutes
and take questions on the first
module that anyone may have
hi professor yes please hi who am i
talking to you
hi i'm sabakram professor i have pleased
to talk to you about
yes uh i have question about labs
when you will give the invitation for
lab
um are you a postgraduate student safar
yeah sabah sabah so you should have
already received one if you have not
received
one get in touch with me i will sort it
for you
okay i didn't receive one that's why i
saw you
every one of you should have already i
mean the
uh for the postgraduate ones
we have created seven channels and each
one of you
would be in one lab
channel if you have not received one
that's fine
just send me an email or just ping me on
teams and i can i can solve it for you
okay okay thank you professor
thank you
um excuse me yes one more question
please go ahead please yeah now because
i was abroad
like i was studying oversea now in china
it's kind of like that
so but uh yeah i'm learning the like
undergraduate
as you said the lab only like
heard like a face-to-face one
for undergraduate but i was
you know i was stuck in china and have
no chance to go back to australia
so i don't know what should i do next
about it send me an
email and i will see what i can do to
help you
and there are many like chinese students
which like have the same situation like
me
so they all want to know how to solve
the problem sure look i appreciate that
but please send me an email and perhaps
there are there are various things that
we could do to help you perhaps
open one lab stream online only for
undergraduate students
but we we need to know that so that we
can take appropriate actions
remember that we still have two weeks
for the lab to begin so
if you can send it now we can get going
on that soon
okay i will email you later yes please
okay thanks and and and likewise
just one second and likewise if there
are any other students stuck
overseas undergraduate students who
can't be on campus for the
due to the fact that they are stuck
overseas
please send me an email
hey ferc yes just sorry just quick
question for the undergrad cause
if a group can we make it a four by any
chance please
um and i would prefer not to do that
because i'll have to make an exception
for everyone
okay yeah gotcha thank you thank you
hi father maloney uh with regards to the
take home exam um how long is the window
going to be
uh about two weeks two weeks to complete
the date home exam
yes oh okay thank you you will i mean
you will not be
pressed for time it you'll have
sufficient time to complete it
yeah okay that's what i wanted to know
uh so so it's not kind of like an exam
like
has a limited time so you have a lot of
time to
like finish the final assessment yes so
i mean it's not time-bound we'll
we will hand it out to you we'll give
you two weeks
uh it requires a bit of thinking uh and
that's why
you get the time that you get so it's
it's a bit of complicated
one complicated one like that i wouldn't
say so
yeah i also want one i want to know one
thing
is that subject really hard like to
handle it like
that is i think i mean look
as i said in the in the plan this is an
introductory subject
um so i mean
i mean the word heart is open to
interpretation different people can
see it indifferently but it is quite a
straightforward subject
like if if i study really hard and then
just get everything like
like i need and then i i shall pass
right
attend the lectures do all the labs and
i think you'll be fine
hello sir i had a question yes please
yeah so uh so the sessions
will be recorded and uploaded on the
canvas and then
uh we'll have a session so the lecture
session that will be on thursdays will
be like a doubt session
or again you'll be explaining i will be
going through and explaining everything
again
for the benefit of those who have not
watched those videos and i understand
that people
have work commitments and all not
everyone
but what i would be doing is stopping
very frequently and
and fielding questions okay like this
for example
yeah okay yeah okay that's it thank you
hi freak um i have a question uh
yes so i'm uh not an offshore student so
i'm in
australia but i live quite far away from
campus about like two two and a half
hours sometimes and so the
um like the times for the uh
on campus activities are a bit uh
like inconvenient for me so is it fine
if i um join the online activity
instead uh look i'm i'm quite uh
sympathetic to your situation again
please send me an email and we'll see
what i can do
okay so just send an email to just
confirm because right now i'm in i'm
enrolled
on the um online uh
like lecture uh online uh tutorial and i
already have i've already been added to
it on teams
and so i was just wondering if like do i
need to do anything beyond that
if you if you're already are you an
undergraduate student
yeah i am uh did you send me an email
and that's why you were added
is that how you end no um because once i
found out that
um there was an online activity on uts
timetable i switched my um
allocation to that but please send me an
email anywhere and i can confirm it
sure thing thank you thank you
hi for can i just uh jump in as as well
and sort of speaking of the uts
timetable i'm a bit confused about the
timing around
on that table that you had with easter
and so on
because good friday's on april the
second which is the end of week six
and the uts timetable shows the lecture
going ahead for the um the thursday
which is the first of april
and only the tutorial the friday
tutorials being postponed
to the following week is that is that cr
is that correct
are we going off the official timetable
or has there been a change that hasn't
been updated yet on that timetable
look this change may perhaps come and
be reflected in the official timetable
but
the the plan that i have showed you
on the ppt slides is is the one that
will be following and the reason for
that let me give you all a bit of
background is i can't
expect to give you a lab description or
a lab
task before i have explained things to
you and you see there are a number of
different labs
some before the lecture and some after
the lecture
okay so like for for example today is
thursday there are few labs there is 11
tuesday
so i have to be consistent throughout
uh so the uts timetable would be updated
but i will be
sending you all details about when we
are breaking for easter and when when
the sessions are being held or not on
canvas
any other questions before we jump on to
the second module
um hi my name is saad i have a question
uh yes sir go ahead please and you talk
about that first few weeks we will be um
working on aws and then rest of the
weeks we will be
working on force.com is there any reason
we are moving from aws to force.com
that's a good question sir the only
reason is i wanted you to get a flavor
for two
different cloud platforms there is a
follow-on subject to this
that we teach which goes by the name of
architecting on aws if you want to get
more specialized
in-depth knowledge in that area that is
perhaps the one you should be taking
thank you thank you
uh farooq i have one more question
please go ahead
yep this is in regards to being a
postgraduate student
so for the postgraduate on the timetable
i see that it's only online activities
does that mean it's only online
activities there's no i don't have to
attend a lab at some point in the future
the labs are all online for posts
for postgraduate students thanks for the
qualification
this year and that's not my decision
that's the uts and fvit policy
now before we go ahead to the next one i
would like to talk briefly about
assignment groupings
there are first of all you're you're
most
welcome to make groups of three along
with
friends that you see in your tutorial
group
you the group can also comprise of
people
outside the tutorials for example in the
postgraduate version of the subject we
have seven tutorials
your group does not necessarily need to
comprise of people from one tutorial
only
you can have one each from three
different tutorials that's perfectly
fine
however given that there are
different learning outcomes and delivery
tasks for undergraduate and postgraduate
i cannot have a group of undergraduate
and postgraduate mixed
okay so you can have a group of
postgraduate students they can be
from more than one tutorial group of
postgraduate students that's perfectly
fine
similarly undergraduate students you can
have group of three
from more than one tutorial group
of undergraduate students that's
perfectly fine as well
so in terms of the logistics or the
avenues for forming groupings
i have a few suggestions especially
for postgraduate students for
undergraduate students i believe it's
relatively much more easier because you
would be coming onto campus you would be
seeing your colleagues
and friends face to face and you can
make groups
then and there
for post graduate students i've got a
few suggestions
first of all you're most welcome to use
uh the discussion boards uh
for uh uh first of all you can move
you can use the discussion board and you
can
uh um you can you can put details and
people i mean your friends may respond
and that's one way you can make a group
i'm not saying that this is the only way
but that's one way you can make a group
the second way is in your tutorial
um what you could do
is when the tutorials start
uh you can send a message saying that
look i'm looking for a group of
so-and-so and so and so on again that's
another avenue
that you can make a group
however internally when i release the
assignment next week
we have a deadline for everyone to be in
a group i mean
i can't remember the deadline at the top
of my head but
we'll give you one or two weeks to do
that
if you are unable to do it we will help
you
in putting in a group and will
post everything on canvas so that you
think um
you you think that the groups and are
all there so
as i said in the first instance please
use
discussion board second instance please
use your tutorial
uh chat and those things i mean
that your tutors will be would be most
uh happy to help you the third and the
last one
is if you can't do that we will help you
i mean
by by v i mean me and your your your
great tutors will help you
putting yourself into a group don't
worry
or don't lose sleep about the fact that
you are unable to get into a group we
will at the very last stage
step in and we'll help you to put into a
group by the deadline
okay so now that i've mentioned about
the
groups themselves let's go to the second
module
and i hope that you can see
my screen on cloud computing
fundamentals
so can i ask everyone please like before
if you can please
mute yourself so this is for everyone
one second
okay so the first module if you all
remember
we discussed about
the subject itself now we'll go and look
in the second module we'll try to get a
better appreciation about
what actually is cloud computing and
more importantly i want to give you
take you down history lane
and give you a brief on how did cloud
computing come about
so the learning objectives particularly
what we would be covering
in the second module are as follows
first one
as i said is i will give you a history
of how the discipline of computing
has evolved and you may be wondering
why is that important well it's very
important because
it will help you to understand how
and where and why cloud computing came
about
cloud computing hasn't come out of thin
air
but it is it has come about because of
systematic progression and evolution in
both hardware and software
then we will try to understand what
cloud computing
means uh and we'll do that together
and then we'll try to understand what
are the key business drivers of cloud
computing what's
actually making it so popular
but then also we will also discuss the
key parameters of cloud computing
you would see the word cloud used in a
very loose manner many different types
what are the key features or parameters
that should
be there for a service to be defined as
cloud service so we will cover all of
this
in this module in good time so
um if we take if you go down how
computing hardware has evolved
i'm sure every one of you in this
team's chat would agree with me that
there has
there has been tremendous evolution
in the history of computing hardware
what you see
on your screen is perhaps the computer
of the 1950s
this part here what the the the bulky tv
that you see is perhaps the monitor this
part the bench here perhaps the keyboard
and i'm guessing this is just a guess
that wheel you see
is perhaps a mouse to maneuver things
around
so quite understandably
in the in the 1950s computers were there
but they were perhaps a i wouldn't say
they were perhaps a good thing to have
uh they were quite uh fancy in the sense
that
no one saw a real purpose in them they
were
huge big bulky machines
they were extremely limited in terms of
what processing power they had
what memory they had and don't forget
they were horrifying they were horribly
expensive
okay they were perhaps tools or gadgets
that one would like to have
but perhaps with very little
applications
so fast forward 10 years and things
started changing
this was the era of the main frames
increasingly businesses they started to
see
in digitizing their processes and one of
the first
process that they started to digitize
was pay
processes like payroll for example
you put everything into that software
and then automatically the payroll
application works there was catch to
it though i mean computers were there
and what you see
is the main frame of the 1960s
but then again they were very very
expensive
so the question was
how can organizations especially small
and medium organizations
make use of these computers if they are
so expensive
and in answer to that question
came this concept of what is known as
time sharing or virtualization
um what that meant is using
some form of mechanism or some mechanism
you can have data of more than one
organization being used
or being housed in this commercial
mainframe
but there is very clear separation of
data
and process what's a person who should
be accessing
data about organization a
will not be able to access data about
organization b
although both of them are sitting on the
same
commercial hardware and that technology
was known as virtualization and
virtualization
as it exists i mean is a term that
is used even today in cloud computing
although the uh the mechanism of
virtualization has changed
dramatically and we will look at that
during week
during week three when we discuss about
virtual machines and virtualization
and even in today's lecture in the third
module
i will explain you what virtualization
is
the mechanism has changed but the
concept remains the same
the fact that more than one
business can use the same piece of
hardware
without compromising on privacy or
security of each other
so during the era of
mainframes again these were
very expensive machines and hence as i
said because of the fact that
multiple organizations could share
could have data being processed at the
same time
the costs could perhaps be spread over
organizations
typical memory power of these mainframes
was about 128 megabytes hardly anything
these days even small sensors have
more memory power than that typically
processing power
ranged from 80 to 50 mips
again insignificant in today's
terms but
this the highlight was that in 1960s at
least
there was some business applications of
business use of computers
fast forward another 20 years and that
was the era of
pcs or personal computers something that
ibm pioneered during that age and what i
would like you to see
is how much compact a pc
is just visually as compared to
a computer in the 1960s for example
okay and and the reason why
a pc could be so compact is because of
the advances
in microprocessor technology you could
fill the
you could fix a lot more microprocessors
onto a piece of chip
um and due to advances in technology
again for a typical pc uh
the typical memory would be around 16
kilobytes
and if you paid a little bit more you
could perhaps get a powerful version
perhaps 256 kilobytes
the typical non-volatile memory by which
i mean hard disk memory is four
megabytes
and processing power four to eight
megahertz
again in today's terms these numbers
pale in significance but then you would
be able to see how
slowly and slowly computers are becoming
more mainstream with the
with the pc 1990s
was quite revolutionary from a computing
viewpoint what was quite
important in 1990s was the mechanism
or development of technology
using which a computer such as computer
a
could address or send messages or
packets to computer b
perhaps remo perhaps physically situated
on the other side of the globe and that
was
due to the development of tcp ip
protocol
the the world wide web as we know of it
today
is based on i mean not largely but i
mean a significant
part of it is based on the tcp
during the 1990s there was widespread
adoption of the world wide web
and growing more networks and
communication networks
in the latter half of 1990s
people started using computers for
solving complicated problems
let me give you an idea and that led to
the evolution
of what we today know as grid computing
let me give you the idea about what a
grid is
and why grid computing came about
so if say for example as i said in the
90s
with the adoption of the world wide web
and the
proliferation of computers people
started getting
computers machines servers but as you
would imagine
not all of these machines or servers
were utilizing
were fully utilized what i mean by that
is
this machine may have a utilization
profile
of 70 percent this one
80 percent that means the remaining 20
percent
it is lying idle this machine may have
90 percent but still remaining 10
percent is idle
this machine may have 95 percent still 5
in other words the idea was that if you
look at
across the world there are
a lot of computers even today
uh which are lying partially ways their
their compute capacity
is not being fully utilized
on the other hand we have
problems real problems in the area of
medical sciences for example geological
sciences
astronomy where to solve these problems
they need
a lot of computation power take the
example of
gene sequencing for example that is a
computationally expensive problem
but back in the 1990s while that
problem i mean researchers were finding
a way to solve that problem
they did not have a computer powerful
enough to solve that problem
so they thought of a very ingenious
solution
why don't we collect
all the unutilized capacity from across
all the nodes who want to contribute
towards solving this problem
so therein came the idea of grid
computing
so what happens in grid is let us say
that this is a
problem again gene sequencing problem
for example
in great computing you have a grid
control node
which is nothing you can think of it
like a coordinator
and then you have got perhaps n number
of different grid participating nodes
and each grid participating node has a
certain utilization profile
sometimes it's free most of the times
it's busy so the the job of the grid
control node then becomes take this
problem
chop it down or sequence it down to
smaller
sub problems that can be
scheduled in each one of these
individual nodes
and these individual nodes they solve
that that small part of the problem
give it back and the grid control node
then combines them together
so this this whole architecture what you
see on the screen
is an illustration a simple illustration
of
how great computing works now you might
be wondering
why am i talking about grid computing in
a cloud computing class
and the reason is not far to seek cloud
computing
is the next evolution of grid computing
and i'll show you in a little while how
so moving on i discussed about all the
ways in which
hardware has evolved moving on
from 1950s to ibm pc
to grid computing the evolution of
computing
software has been equally impressive
and many of you who have been software
programmers would be able to
attest to what i'm saying
way back about in the 1970
or so the philosophy or the way in which
software applications were written
was known as process oriented
what we mean by process is just
perhaps functions so you had one
function then another function then
another function
and these functions had long bits and
pieces of codes
inside them these functions they
they consumed data in that application
and they gave it the output
there was perhaps very little structure
uh into them it was just function after
function after function
okay and that was known as process
oriented architecture
around the 19 i mean after process
the design philosophy in which software
was written
object oriented architecture and i'm
sure many of you
have heard of object oriented
programming or have even written code
using
object oriented languages it continues
to this day
so object oriented programming
i mean the whole idea in object oriented
programming is that if
i look at the world around me it doesn't
comprise of functions
for example at the moment if i look
around i can see this
pen i can see a mouse i can perhaps see
this laptop
and a desk i don't see any function
around me
so instead of writing or
modeling an application as function
after function
why don't we model it as a collection of
objects
so for example if i see an employee and
if i'm writing an hr application
let's write an employee class
in which i've got attributes of the
employee or properties
and the functions of that employee and
these functions
they access these properties of the
employee class
and so object oriented programming and
thinking was
a fundamental shift in the way software
applications
are written and during the course
of realizing its objective when you
run a code these objects they
send messages to each other they
communicate with each other
and they invoke each other okay
so building on from object oriented
programming as the base
the next level higher up was service
oriented architectures and this was
around the turn of the century
or even a little bit later than that and
the idea is
very intuitive if i look at a student
application
let's take an example uts student
management application
okay notionally speaking
it does certain activities
or tasks or it gives me certain services
for example when i am trying to
access it the first thing that it
perhaps does is
it carries out an authentication
it can use a username password
two-factor authentication
or many of the different ways of
authentication but the first thing that
it does is perhaps
it gives me an authentication service
then the next thing it does is perhaps
there is a billing service for
generating a bill
for how much money is owed
for new students there is perhaps a
registration service
so instead of
viewing these as
functions in service oriented
architecture
each one here is viewed as a service
in the sense that the authentication
module
provides a well-defined service
to the other modules within the
within the application each one of these
modules or each one of these services
much like object oriented they send
messages to
each other they invoke each other and
they pass messages to each other
so this was the whole idea of service
oriented architectures
commonly known as saw very
popular design paradigm and
it continues to this day cloud computing
is
built upon so service oriented
architectures
the whole idea of service oriented
architectures is very intuitive
say for example if i write a application
the uts student management application
using soap principles in which i've got
a registration service here
i've got a billing service here i've got
a
authentication service here and let's
say for argument
sake i want to upgrade the
authentication mechanism from two-factor
authentication to
let's say biometric authentication
i simply need to change this component
and i can purchase this component from
either a third-party vendor
check it in it would inter-operate and
plug and play with other components
so it makes the job of writing software
very easy based on so on
so now if we think of it if you take a
much broader perspective
cloud computing as i said people think
people say is it hardware or is it
software
the correct answer is it's both and you
will come to see
why it's both in a little while but it
has come about
not just in isolation but it has come
about
because of the continuous evolution and
advances in software on one side
on this axis from process oriented to
object oriented to service oriented
and on the hardware from standalone
machines to commercial mainframes to
personal ibm pcs to connected networks
and then great
and the confluence of these two
has resulted in what we see today
as cloud computing without soar
there can be no cloud computing without
the
underlying fundamental principles of
grid there can be no cloud computing as
well
okay and as i said
there are three different flavors of
cloud computing
the first one which is infrastructure as
a service
is largely providing hardware resources
as a service
which is this part platform as a service
and software as a service the other two
flavors
are providing various elements of
software application
as a service we will discuss more about
this
in module 3 and in next week's lecture
as well
so can i give you all just half a minute
to quickly go through
the most through one of the most
commonly accepted definitions of cloud
computing
and this definition is by nist
national institute of standards and
technology
this is a body that whose whole focus
is to develop standards and is to
develop
definitions and standards and they are
not
um i mean they're not driven by
commercial interests
but they are driven by standards
themselves
can i give you 30 seconds to quickly go
through the definition please
so the definition goes as follows cloud
computing is a model
for for enabling convenient
on-demand network access that's the key
as a consumer
whenever i need it what whatever
time i need it and irrespective of
what resource are needed i will be able
to get it
on demand over a network
and that network over which
i will be requesting for cloud services
is the world wide web okay so
on demand network access to a shared
pool
of configurable computing resources so
these are the computing resources
that are provided as a service
some examples are networks servers
storage software application
completed software services i mean all
of these are examples of different
cloud services okay
and these services can be
very rapidly provisioned and released
with minimal effort or service provider
interaction you will see in a little
while when i come to
in infrastructure as a service
that when i need a virtual machine it
will perhaps take me
little less than half a minute to
actually request
and get that virtual machine compare
that
in real life in organizations even in
some organizations which happens today
if you want to purchase a server
right from the point of request to the
point of budgeting
to provisioning to procuring it to
getting it on on premise configuring it
can range between a few weeks to a few
months
okay compare that with cloud which i'll
show you
when i come to infrastructure as a
service it's
relatively instantaneous so that's what
they mean that can be rapidly
provisioned
if i need one i'll get one if i need a
thousand
it will take me the same time if i need
ten thousand
still it will take me the same time and
when i am done when i finished using
them
i can say thank you very much i don't
have to hold on to them
unlike the traditional enterprise
environment in which
if i have procured some devices like
this laptop
i have to keep it i have to manage it i
have to service it
okay and they can be released with
minimal
management effort or service provider
interaction so that's the gist of cloud
computing
some key things some key features that
jump
out from that definition is
first one cloud providers own
a large pool of computer resources
and this is the point that i will be
making again and again and again as we
keep on going through this
subject is that if i've got
cloud providers they own and manage
resources like servers
storage disks network switches
in the order of hundreds of thousands
okay if i've got a provider who perhaps
have half a dozen
servers that doesn't necessarily qualify
him
to be a cloud service provider it's just
too small
okay so cloud providers own in
very large pool of computer resources
what can be these computer resources it
could be as i said it could be networks
servers storage software applications
software development environments any of
these
so these computing resources they are
offered as a service in other words
um you request the cloud service
provider
when you need it the cloud service
provider will
almost instantaneously provide it to you
perhaps the delay there would be a few
seconds 30 seconds
a minute now and once
you don't need it give it back
now another key aspect is that
of scalability
the amount of cloud computing the say
for example on aws or amazon web
services
i can start with just one virtual
machine
and as i see that my i need more the
load on that virtual machine is
increasing
i can go from one to 5 to 10
and then from 10 if the load is not up
to the mark
i can come back to almost 1 or 0 again
depending upon my business needs
depending upon my business requirements
i can dynamically scale up or scale down
there are no obligations for me to be
locked in and say no i have to have at
least
five virtual machines running all the
time
so in order to better understand
cloud computing these are the six
parameters that
typically characterize cloud computing
this is not to say i mean most cloud
services
would have these six parameters let's go
and understand each one of them
in a little bit more detail
the first one as i said is pooling of
computing resources and that's quite
critical
so the big cloud service providers like
google
amazon web services microsoft
procure a very large number of
computing resources be it hardware or
bid
software say for example here i can see
storage
disk they would perhaps have
tens of hundreds of storage disks
in any given data center at any given
point in time
so they have
a very large number of computing
resources
and these computing resources are both
hardware
as well as software and
they are kept in a location the location
the physical location where they are
kept
is known as data centers we will come
back and discuss
more about some of these in a little
while
so it is from these data centers here
that a consumer like you and i
when i request for cloud resources
these resources will be provided or will
be provisioned
over the internet so you see the
internet is the vehicle
or the platform using which these
computing resources
are provided so irrespective of whether
if you are based close to the data
center
or if you are based on the other side of
the globe
you will still be able to access the
cloud resource
what would however vary is the latency
in other words if i am physically close
to the data center the latency i would
experience is far less than
if i am based very far away
from the data center
the second thing is the second
characteristic of
invariably about every cloud resource is
that
you can increase your consumption
of cloud resources or decrease your
consumption of cloud resources
depending upon your business needs you
are not
fixed to any base level you are not
fixed
or held to any any account so let me
give you an example
let us consider a hypothetical scenario
let us consider the
the load on uts servers
during the year from january to december
as you can understand during the
semester
um i mean let's start from january i
mean during january and february as well
the load would not be very high perhaps
let's say that with about
few maybe 10 machines or physical
machines they would be able to
provide reasonable services however
when the semester starts autumn semester
you can imagine that these 10 machines
would perhaps be constrained because
there would be a lot more requests
students coming on campus requesting for
resources so
there would be a need to add more
capacity to this base load
the 10 machines that we have in a
traditional world
what that would mean is going and
ordering
additional servers which is not just
expensive because servers are expensive
but also additional overheads of getting
them
configuring them maintaining them
all those are additional overheads as
well so
during autumn perhaps let's say
hypothetically the number of servers
increase from 10 to 50
and it goes on things go on smoothly
till july
sorry june end of semester during which
again
since the since since its semester break
again the load on those 60 machines drop
so
the difference i mean it drops to about
10 machines so
50 machines are just lying waste and
then it picks up again
during august and then during november
it then drops again
so you see there is a pattern to
resource consumption
by uts and if we
go by the peak load which is 60 machines
it's very expensive
what cloud platforms offer is that
they free up organizations like uts
from procuring any hardware resources
they say just consume it as a service
in january your load is 10 virtual
machines
just use 10. in february as you
as it increases from 10 to 15 week
simply like switching it switching a
button on or
just turning a knob on you can increase
from 10 to 15.
and then in june when the load decreases
again you can turn off the additional
capacity and the load decreases again so
the it's much more easier
for not just i mean businesses like uts
to be able to be
consuming cloud resources because
they don't have to uh
um there are a lot of economic
implications they don't have to number
one go
and procure the hardware resources
upfront which is expensive number one
once they have procured there are
ongoing costs on their management
okay so in other words these
expensive procurement of hardware
can be converted from capital expenses
which is upfront
to ongoing operational expense and
that's
from a business viewpoint it makes a lot
of sense
the next feature which i regard as the
holy grail of cloud computing without
virtualization
there can be no cloud computing and let
me give you
a an example to illustrate my point
let us suppose that i have set up this
data center and these these these
yellow cylinders that you see
are storage disks one terabyte each
and i've got this cloud consumer who
comes up to me and say
okay i want 100 gigabyte of storage
but then you see every storage disk that
i have
is one terabyte but the cloud consumer
is requesting only 100 gigabyte
what do i do i've got two options
either i give the whole desk to him for
free and say look
this is all i have you make use of it in
hardware where you call
you can the other option which is
practiced in cloud computing is somehow
the customer is asking for hundred
gigabyte
this disk is one terabyte i will carve
a small not physically carved but
logically i will carve a small
subsection of this hard disk
and i will give this small subsection to
the cloud consumer
only that small subsection would be 100
gigabyte
so that technology which enables
the cloud service providers to be able
to
slice and dice as they see fit
depending upon the consumer's
requirement
is known as virtualization technology
so you can have on this
storage disk you can have
n number of different users all of them
sitting and using the disk at the same
time
but each one of them would think would
have no clue
that they are sharing it with other
people that's the
beauty of virtualization it gives you
the feeling
that you have access to an entire disk
yourself
so without virtualization this slicing
and dicing is not possible be it
servers be it software
be it virtual machines all of them have
to be virtualized
by running a virtualization layer before
they can be offered to the cloud
consumer
and in week three we will go and look
in detail about virtualization in
hardware
and virtualization in software as well
fourth property of cloud computing is
metered computing resource usage and
that's quite interesting because
many of you would have seen your bill
from telstra for example
or from your water utility bill
it the way that it does it gives you a
very
fine-grained breakdown of
how you have used the resource at what
point in time
what was the cost at that point in time
very similarly in cloud computing if
i've used a virtual machine
it tells me exactly when did i start
using it
if it was night time perhaps the cost
would be less
because not many people are using it if
it's their time the cost could be higher
so there would be differential pricing
and that's mentioned as well
so it enables smes to sign up there is
no obligation
you consume however much you like
and you get a very fine grained
uh metering bill to tell you what
resources have you used
at what point in time and what was the
unit
price much like what you see in a
telecom bill or
a bill from a utility provider as well
resource delivery over the internet i
think
it is given and as i've been stressing
that all the different type of services
that cloud computing offers have to be
delivered over the internet
there is no other goal the delivery
platform is
internet there are three different
flavors of cloud services
the first one is infrastructure as a
service
which means they are providing
virtualized hardware to consumers
and that is the topic for next module
after this one
platform as a service you are providing
virtualized environments that can be
used to build
software applications we will discuss
pass next week and software as a service
is your providing
completed software applications
as a service to the consumers so
irrespective of whether i'm using a
a virtual machine or a
net development environment
virtualize.net development environment
or a office 365
environment all these are delivered
over the internet the last but not the
least
is the fact that deploying resources
the the process of allocating
resources or matching up the cloud
consumer
to the virtual machine or to the
resource
and the provisioning them that is
setting i mean once the
consumer has said that okay i'm done i
don't need that anymore
that is known as deep provisioning all
that process
is completely automated
let me give you an example for those of
you who who know i mean
the process of configuring or deploying
a software application on a server for
example
can take a few hours
the process of configuring a physical
server can take from the from the point
of generating a request to
developing a requisition to procuring to
deploying can take
few days to few weeks
in large-scale cloud service providers
they perhaps provision or they give away
or they deprovision
hundreds of thousands of virtual
machines and virtual instances
per day perhaps more if there is manual
effort involved in there
it would simply not be possible to
deliver at that scale
so all the process of deployment all the
activities needed to deploy
and deprovision are completely automated
there is very little or no
human intervention involved
okay so as you can see there are
multiple benefits from a business
viewpoint for cloud computing
the significant one is the fact that for
small medium organizations and also for
big
organizations i do not have to
invest top dollar or big dollar in
in investments for hardware and software
instead i can focus on my core business
needs
and pay small operational expenses on an
ongoing basis
for what cloud resources i'm consuming
so this shift from away from
capital expenditure to operational
expenditure
that's a key business driver
there are other drivers as well like if
i have procured
hardware resources it's
space is a premium i mean i have to
find space for it i have to manage it i
have to cool it i have to
i mean how how will i do that again
that's a big driver i don't have to
worry about space
and then there is huge reduction in the
time or manpower for planning
purchasing provisioning configuring and
disposing
resources in a non-cloud world you would
have to do
all of this plan for it put up front
capital
provision it hire people and then
dispose of resources
in a non-cloud world you can leave all
that to the cloud service provider
instead use the saved money
for your core business activities
okay and focus on moving from
making focus away from making capital
expense
to operational expense
so one of the and i will say this a few
times
the biggest cloud service provider that
we know today
is amazon web services and i
heard a statistic which i'm sure holds
true even now
the capacity that they have the capacity
of resources
that aws has is greater than the
capacity of the next
three or four competitors put together
okay so but how did aws
come about i thought this is an
interesting story and i must share with
you all
so amazon web services
it is it is a sister company the sister
business for
amazon and uh so you you
i'm sure you would all be aware of
amazon
um marketplace which started off as an
online bookstore or an e-commerce market
and in the during the dot com and all
there was a
high growth in their business and they
did some really good
interesting things like amazon merchants
in which merchants would bring their
stuff on amazon
and i'm not i'm not saying amazon web
services but on
amazon and that meant that
they needed because people are using
their
servers more amazon needed to buy
even more to keep up with the pace of
business growth
during december around christmas there
was a peak
always there is a peak in their use of
resources on the amazon cloud and to
account for that peak they always keep
on purchasing
more resources however aside from the
christmas
duration like just after december they
found that a
significant portion of their
computing resources remained idle
no one was using it and hence they had
to wait till next
year uh when christmas comes for them to
be used
so they started thinking look this idle
capacity which we have
can we try to monetize it can we try to
provision this or sell this in any way
and that's where the whole idea of
amazon web services
came about and they launched in 2002
with the view to just sell ideal
computing resources
to other organizations and in the next
module you will see
how they have grown enormously and what
services they offer
so utility computing i mean cloud
computing people regard
cloud computing as a utility computing
now
in other words computing resources like
hardware or software due to cloud
computing and only due to cloud
computing
have become like a utility so i'm sure
all of you in this meeting or in this
chat
i mean in your homes you have access to
water
electricity and gas but none of you
have or in in your homes have say
water purifiers or water filtration
process
or an electricity generation company or
a gas company for that matter
what we all have is we have a contract
with sydney water in this case
we pay them depending upon our
consumption
and they give us the water resource
similarly
with western power or whatever your
electricity provider is you have a
similar arrangement
computing or computing resources
are a fifth utility now in which
irrespective of what computing resources
you need whether it is hardware
or software all you need to do is go to
the website
request for it and you will be provided
that in a matter of seconds and when you
don't need it
just say thank you very much the initial
or setup costs
are zero and you can pay
as an operational expense as you go
so cloud computing is the
vehicle or the platform by which
computing has become a utility
these are some of the cloud products the
list keeps on increasing
i'm sure all of you have made use of
these
wonderful google products like gmail
calendar
docs gmail all these are example of
software as a service for example amazon
products like ec2 and s3 we will discuss
them in a little while
dropbox i'm sure many of you
use it or have used it again an example
of a great cloud service
so that brings me to end of second
module what i would like to do is
perhaps
break for some questions i'll
can i can any if you've got any
questions can i please answer them
before i go to the
last module please
hi professor hi uh i have question
about scaling up and scaling down damage
services
every time we need every time consumer
need to contract with the
provider when scaling down or scaling up
that is a very interesting question the
process of scaling up and scaling down
can be automated as well
i will answer that in the next module
okay thank you
i mean you you're most welcome to
contact them and they will scale up or
scale down
but you can set up rules and say if
these conditions are satisfied please
scale down
or if these conditions are satisfied
please scale up
i will show you a few examples in the
next module
okay thank you
anything else any other questions please
hi i have a question like we know there
are different kind of clouds like
private community cloud public cloud and
hybrid cloud
yeah and one of the characteristics of
cloud would be
resource delivery over the internet so
my question is is it also applicable for
the private cloud
okay that is actually a good question i
mean um
private it may not necessarily be
applicable for private clouds because
look private clouds are for a private
organization itself so they may want to
keep it
in the internet as opposed to internet
what i'm talking about is about public
and hybrid clouds
yeah thank you so much
any other question or we can quickly go
to the
third and the final module
hello folk hi hi i would just like to
quickly ask
if you could elaborate on what you meant
about uh latency
when you were talking about it before
that is a good question
i will be giving practical examples of
this in the next one but the basic idea
is as follows
i'm not sure if you have tried to
access websites which are geographically
away from us like perhaps a
web page in the us which is actually
based in the us or europe
um you may not have seen it but the
response time for
the time it takes for the request from
me to the location there
and then back would be perhaps
um few milliseconds or so
okay whereas if
if that data center is located within
australia
it will be a fraction of that okay
it's difficult for me to give numbers
but it's safe to say that
if i'm sending packets over the internet
and these packets have to travel
across continents and underneath oceans
and to a
very distant place they take time
you may or you may not notice it but it
is in the
microseconds but still it takes longer
than if it is located
close to you in other words the response
time is
a direct function or is directly a
direct function of
the geographical distance uh
so if i've got a service close to me
i'll get a quicker response
maybe few i mean
very very less and if i've got something
very
far away it can take a long time and
there are
ways to address that as well but that is
something that you should be aware of
that latency is a factor and it depends
on how far
the actual data center is from us
yep sounds good thanks okay and i'll
elaborate this very soon when we come to
aws
because within their design
this is a big consideration for them
when we develop applications
professor may i have uh questions
yes please uh so you were talking about
latency right now
and i'd like to know like most of the
data centers nowadays uh
repeat data centers like to uh
follow up like on larger scales like if
i'm
sitting in india and i'm i'm operating
netflix
and netflix is a us-based company so
they have installed a repeater box kind
of
with all the major isps yes do you think
those repeater boxes can also contribute
to the latency delays
to the server which which boxes
the repeaters of repeater boxes like
because they again it will redirect the
request to the server and look look
that's a good question
uh what they do is all these content is
uh you're talking about netflix as an
example
you address latency what they do in the
cloud world is they have something known
as content distribution network
cdns so
i i i have a content i put it in the
cloud and i link it to the cdn
the cdn will del will will replicate it
in many different
locations in the world not necessarily
just the us
okay okay so if i am accessing from
australia
i'll be accessing the cdn closes
to australia perhaps either in australia
itself or in the apac region
okay okay thank you professor okay
a lot of these questions tied to the
next module so i think it's a
it's a good time to commence with that
the next module
again i thank you all for your continued
interest and
this is the final module for this week
and again i have i've recorded uh this
module
so you can go and listen to it when you
are available
the topic for this module is
infrastructure as a service so just give
me a second please
so what we would be learning today is
about i will be giving you a brief a
brief introduction about what we mean by
computing hardware in enterprises
just so that you get a feel for it then
we will understand what we mean by
infrastructure as a service
and and i did say that cloud computing
or cloud services
come in three different flavors
infrastructure as a service is the basic
or one type of cloud service
we will then understand the generic
architecture of the infrastructural
service provisioning
stack in other words what does an
is provider need to do and for the
better part of today's lecture
i will be talking about aws
and the various and some of the various
services that they have
on offer so
computing infrastructure
it comes in many different shapes and
forms
it's not possible for me or for anyone
else to list
the different types of computing
infrastructure
it comes in various different shapes and
forms as i said you can have
web servers you can have application
servers which are
or you can have middleware servers you
can have
database servers in each one of these
the web servers
application and database servers
you can have varying capacity needs so
one can be perhaps very computationally
intensive one can not be so and if you
have got
multiple of these web application and
database servers you need to be able to
load balance between them that is
another
another infrastructure need furthermore
you can have storage servers
store store memory i mean and by memory
we mean
uh volatile memory that means ram and
that comes in many different flavors
these days you have
ssds previously you had sd
rd many different types and then you
have got
non-volatile memory which is um
hard disk and again i mean you can have
10 terabyte 1530 so
the basic point of listing this is that
for any organization
working out its computing infrastructure
requirement is a tedious job
and even if somehow by some
quirk as an organization you have worked
out exactly what you need
and you go and invest your capital and
and procure it the rate at which
computing infrastructure evolves and
enhances
is exponential so variations and
enhancement so if i purchase something
today
chances are in two years time it will be
obsolete
okay more so for a business
if i've got certain infrastructure needs
today
they may or may not be current tomorrow
as well for example
if i am a small business
or a transportation company for example
today my business may be just using
simple office applications
okay if i'm using very simple office
applications
my infrastructure requirements would
also be quite simple
but if tomorrow for some business needs
i have to use sophisticated applications
like tableau
or i need powerful machines
my computing infrastructure requirement
will be much
higher in other words trying to
predict the future computing
infrastructure needs of
enterprises is almost like looking into
that crystal gaze ball and gazing into
it and trying to predict
what is needed in the future okay
it's it's it's almost it's difficult
and even if you somehow do it
you're going to spend a lot of upfront
capital and it will go obsolete very
soon
two to three years time what is more
is once i have procured it uh
my my capital spend
does not stop there doesn't stop only at
the procurement
i need to have people to manage it to
keep it
i need to have real estate to manage it
and keep it as well
so for a business which
is not i.t focused or by not rt focused
means that
which is whose core business is not to
deliver i.t services but is to deliver
say
health related services or
transportation related services or
mining related services it's a big
investment
it's a big headache to be able to work
out these needs
for these businesses it would make
complete sense
if somehow we could
rent these computing hardware
as we need them whenever we need them
and when we don't need them we say thank
you very much we'll come and we'll come
back and see you when we need more
so this whole idea the fact that
computing hardware things like
web servers database servers network
switches
load balancers um
can be rented based on my business needs
as and when i want and can be returned
back when i don't need them
is known as infrastructure as a service
okay so as again i will refer to the
nist which is as i said national
institute for standards and technology
definition of infrastructure as a
service
can i give you all half a second to go
through this
so that i can dissect the definition and
understand it with you
in a bit more detail
okay
so
so uh with the definition of
infrastructure as a service please read
with me carefully here
the capability provided to the consumer
is to provision processing
storage networks and
other fundamental computing resources
please note here it does not mention
that the capability provided is
software it does not mention that the
capability provided is
the ability to build or write
programming applications
but it says the capability provided is
fundamental computing resources such as
processing storage networks
that i as a consumer i can provision
i can get them and i can run
any application i like okay i can deploy
and run any arbitrary software
that is the essence of infrastructure as
a service
in other words i can provision a vm
i can install linux on it i can install
windows
on it i can install ubuntu on it it's my
choice
i can run any software applications i
like on it the cloud
provider will not constrain me for it
okay so some of the key elements that i
have picked out from that definition so
that we
i can stress on them is the is
the fact of provisioning what is being
provisioned
only fundamental base level
hardware resources are being provisioned
in
infrastructure as a service what are
these
examples include network switches
routers servers
database servers load balancers so and
so and so forth
uh software and all of that
is in a different bucket altogether not
in infrastructure as a service
okay as a cloud consumer when i
provision
i can run any software i like as i told
you
okay it's my choice and
the consumer which is me i do not have
to worry
about managing the underlying hardware
resources
i do not have to worry about procuring
them more importantly i do not have to
worry about
storing them and hiring people to manage
them
that's the job of the cloud service
provider
okay so with this what do you think are
the business implications
of infrastructure as a service first and
foremost something that i have been
emphasizing
right throughout and i'll keep on doing
that because that's a key
fundamental characteristic of any cloud
service
is the low entry barrier if i have to go
and procure a
physical web service costs a few
thousand dollars
most businesses will not be able to do
so
in infrastructure as a service there is
no
upfront p fee i can just
sign in instantiate and i
keep on paying for it as you go
there are no administrative or
maintenance expenses for the cloud
consumer so
i don't have to worry about managing it
maintaining it hiring people i don't
have to worry about
space for for for storing these machines
for cooling them for managing them
and the cloud consumer in return for
all of this is charged is send a bill
and these bills are paid usually on a
monthly basis
so this ladies and gentlemen is the most
simplest form of cloud service
known as infrastructure as a service
there are more sophisticated forms
platform as a service and software as a
service
and we will look at them
in next week's lecture so
if if you and i want to get into the
business
of providing infrastructure as a service
what do we need to do we need to set up
the infrastructure as a service
provisioning
stack iwa stack
it's important that we understand
the iwa stack because it
it gives you a sense of what goes behind
the scenes
in the process of providing
infrastructure as a service
there are four layers in the
infrastructure as a service stack the
co-location layer
hardware layer virtualization layer
and service layer let's go and
explore take a deep dive in each one of
these four
to try to understand what purpose
each one of them self so
this is how i mean these if as i said
this is the conceptual representation if
i am an
infrastructure as a service provider i
have
to set up this stack in other words
these four layers
so the first layer is the co-location
layer extremely important
this co-location layer this
provides the basic fundamental
requirements
needed to provide infrastructure as a
service
although i'm talking about co-location
layer here
in the context of infrastructure as a
service
it holds true for platform and for
software as well
so let us say any cloud service provider
the first thing that they will think
about
is where can i get electricity power
because that's that's the key ingredient
that is powering the data center and
they don't need small
amount i mean their requirements are
huge
just to give you an idea i had an
incredible statistic
that some of the big data centers that
google
aws and those people and microsoft have
they consume similar amount of
electricity
as that of the city of detroit just
imagine
okay so they have i mean as you can see
these data centers they are run
on electric power and to make sure
that there is no shortage of it
and to make sure that if one if power
supply from
one electric service provider fails
there is a backup
what they do is they contract and they
have
electricity power lines running in from
multiple
power suppliers so that if power supply
from
one provider fails you have got the
second one as well
and perhaps a third one as well okay
many of these huge cloud service
providers like aws
and google they have generators
in their data center so that they can
run the data centers without any
external power supply for
perhaps a limited duration of time in in
case everything else fails
the second consideration is where can i
get
cheap and reliable bandwidth and that's
critical
as i've been explaining you the internet
is the vehicle on which
the cloud service is being delivered if
i don't have proper bandwidth
running out of the cloud service
provider or the data center
how am i going to deliver the cloud
resources so
very much again i mean what they do is
they don't
contract or take um wireless
supplies and those things but they have
physical copper wires
physical links running into the data
center
again not from one internet service
provider
but perhaps from multiple ones of them
okay and again this they have this in
multiple because
of to ensure redundancy if one fails
you have the second one third one
is the cooling as i said if you have got
imagine if you have got hundreds of
thousands of different forms of servers
running in a data center
you would need to cool them and you want
to cool them efficiently
that's a major cost constraint okay
so in other words the real estate